.\" genpass.1 - man page for genpass
.TH GENPASS 1 "2026\-03\-06" "genpass 0.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
genpass \- readable and pronounceable password generator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B genpass
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIformat\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B genpass
generates random passwords from a template. You specify the format as a
sequence of type letters followed by length (e.g. \fBW4s2w3d5\fR).
Output is one password per line; the last used format is remembered and can
be recalled with \fB\-\-last\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print help and exit.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print version and exit.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR \fIN\fR, \fB\-\-number\fR=\fIN\fR
Number of passwords to generate (default: 3).
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-last\fR
Use the last remembered format instead of a format argument.
.SH FORMAT
The format is a string of type\-length pairs with no separators. Each pair is
one letter (type) followed by one or more digits (length). If the length is
omitted, it defaults to 1 (for example, \fBW\fR).
.TP
\fBW\fR
Uppercase word (consonant\-vowel style, first letter capital).
.TP
\fBw\fR
Lowercase word (consonant\-vowel).
.TP
\fBP\fR
Pronounceable uppercase (uses digraphs like th, sh, ch, qu; first letter capital).
.TP
\fBp\fR
Pronounceable lowercase (digraphs: th, sh, ch, qu, wh, ph, ck, ng; oo, ee, ea, ai, oa).
.TP
\fBd\fR
Digits (0\-9).
.TP
\fBs\fR
Special symbols (!@#$%^&*~><(),\\=/;:+\-.[]_).
.PP
Length is the number of characters for that segment (e.g. \fBw4\fR = 4 lowercase
word characters). Length must not exceed 255 per segment.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B genpass W4s2w3d5
Generate 3 passwords like \fBCyvi!:wof90943\fR (4 uppercase word + 2 special + 3 word + 5 digits).
.TP
.B genpass p8d2 \-n 5
Generate 5 pronounceable passwords of 8 letters plus 2 digits (e.g. \fBtheeng42\fR).
.TP
.B genpass \-l \-n 2
Generate 2 passwords using the last remembered format.
.SH FILES
.TP
\fI~/.genpass_memory\fR
Stores the last used format (read with \fB\-\-last\fR, updated after each run).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
Success.
.TP
1
Invalid options or missing format.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xkcdpass (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Readable password generator by crow16384.
